This is Jacob's Research Journal. Today's deep dive: What "fifty-five
percent replicate" actually means. The headline number from the biggest
replication study social science has ever run sounds almost reassuring.
Fifty-five percent of findings held up. Slightly better than a
coin flip. Half the building is still standing. But "fifty-five
percent replicate" is, it turns out, the optimistic interpretation. If
you look at what happened to the studies that did
replicate — not just whether they were statistically significant, but
how big the effects were — the picture looks considerably
worse. The median effect size in original papers was a
Pearson's r of zero-point-two-five. In the replications, it was zero-point-one-zero.
That's an eighty-two-point-four percent reduction in shared variance. The researchers
ran these replications with median statistical power of ninety-nine-point-six percent,
meaning they were essentially guaranteed to detect the original effect
if it existed at the original size. What they found
instead was a ghost of it. That number deserves more
attention than it's getting. The study. In April twenty-twenty-six, Nature
published a suite of companion papers reporting the results of
a years-long, multi-institution effort to replicate and assess reproducibility across
the social and behavioral sciences. The primary replication paper, led
by researchers affiliated with dozens of universities, attempted to replicate
two hundred and seventy-four specific claims from one hundred and
sixty-four papers published between two-thousand-nine and two-thousand-eighteen, drawn from fifty-four
journals spanning psychology, economics, sociology, education, and political science. The
replications were pre-registered, used original materials wherever available, and were
internally peer-reviewed before the results were known. This wasn't a
sloppy gotcha exercise — it was as rigorous as large-scale
replication gets. The fifty-five-point-one percent figure — that's one hundred
and fifty-one of two hundred and seventy-four claims, with a
ninety-five percent confidence interval from forty-nine-point-two to sixty-point-nine percent —
is the rate at which replications produced a statistically significant
result in the same direction as the original. That's one
reasonable definition of "replication." But it's the most generous one.
By a per-paper measure, accounting for papers with multiple claims,
the rate drops to forty-nine-point-three percent. And when you look
at effect sizes — how strong the effect is, not
just whether it exists — the picture changes completely. Even
papers that "replicated" did so at dramatically lower magnitudes. An
effect that was supposed to explain six percent of variance
in the original study explains one percent in the replication.
Statistically significant, but not the same finding. This matters because
most of what social-science findings get used for — policy
recommendations, media coverage, classroom instruction, clinical practice guidelines — depends
on magnitude, not just direction. Knowing that some intervention has
an effect on some outcome is almost useless. Knowing how
big the effect is, whether it's big enough to matter
in the real world, whether it replicates at practical scale
— that's what makes a finding actionable. And on that
standard, the replication picture is considerably darker than fifty-five percent.
The citation paradox. The twenty-twenty-six Nature findings raise a question
that researchers had already started to answer before this study
was published: what actually happens after a finding fails to
replicate? In twenty-twenty-one, researchers Marta Serra-Garcia and Uri Gneezy published
a paper in Science Advances with an unsettling finding about
citation patterns. They looked at papers that had undergone replication
attempts and compared how often papers that replicated got cited
versus papers that didn't. The result: nonreplicable publications were cited
roughly sixteen times more per year than replicable ones. This
difference didn't change after the replication failures were published. More
striking: only twelve percent of citations to papers after a
failed replication made any reference to the failure. Think about
what that means structurally. The replication system is designed to
correct the scientific record. When a finding fails to replicate,
the theory is that scientists update their beliefs, stop building
on that finding, and eventually it fades from the literature.
The Serra-Garcia and Gneezy data shows that's not what happens.
The record-correction mechanism is almost inert. Failed findings keep accumulating
citations, keep getting taught, keep influencing the research questions other
scientists ask. The correction is quietly ignored. Why? The incentives
are backwards. A surprising, counterintuitive finding that generates massive citations
— even if it later fails to replicate — makes
a career. The replication paper that kills it generates a
fraction of the attention. The journal that publishes the original
study benefits from the prestige; the journal that publishes the
correction benefits from very little. There's no formal mechanism to
demote a high-cited paper because it failed to replicate; it
still shows up at the top of Google Scholar, still
gets included in meta-analyses, still makes its way into the
textbooks. Discipline variation. The twenty-twenty-six Nature papers also show meaningful
variation across disciplines, which is analytically interesting because it suggests
the problem isn't uniformly distributed — and therefore might have
identifiable causes. Education achieved the highest replication rate at approximately
sixty-three percent; economics fell to the bottom at roughly forty-three
percent, according to coverage of the study. The specific discipline
rankings carry uncertainty given the small samples involved; the Nature
authors note that some discipline estimates have, quote, high uncertainty.
One interpretation: economics has a higher rate of field experiments
and natural experiments that are inherently hard to replicate exactly,
because the circumstances change. Another interpretation: economics has stronger norms
around sharp causal identification than, say, social psychology — which
means the claims that make it into high-prestige journals are
more often exactly the kind of surprising, counterintuitive treatment effects
that are vulnerable to p-hacking and publication bias. The discipline
with the most rigorous-seeming methods may have the worst replication
problem precisely because the methods provide good cover for over-claiming.
There's a companion paper in the same Nature issue on
economics and political science specifically, which found eighty-five percent of
published claims were computationally reproducible — meaning you can rerun
the code and get the same numbers — but only
seventy-two percent were statistically robust to reasonable variations in specification.
Reproducibility and replicability are different standards. You can reproduce the
exact numbers from a published dataset while the underlying claim
still doesn't hold up in a new sample. The eighty-five
percent figure is often cited as reassuring; it's mostly measuring
whether the code runs, not whether the finding is real.
Why reform isn't working. The obvious policy response to a
replication crisis is open science reform: pre-registration — committing publicly
to your hypothesis and analysis plan before running the experiment
— data sharing, and registered reports, where journals agree to
publish a study before seeing the results. These are good
ideas in principle, and they've been spreading through psychology and
economics for the better part of a decade. So how's
that working? The evidence is mixed, and some of it
is actively discouraging. A twenty-twenty-five analysis of articles that earned
pre-registration badges at Psychological Science found that eighty-nine percent included
undisclosed changes to the original pre-registration plan — modifications to
the hypothesis, the variables, the exclusion criteria, or the analytic
approach. The badge, meant to signal methodological rigor, was in
most cases masking researcher degrees of freedom just as it
was being claimed to eliminate them. The reform was being
gamed before it had fully arrived. Pre-registration doesn't fail because
scientists are dishonest. It fails because there's no credible enforcement
mechanism and the underlying incentives — the career reward for
a significant finding — haven't changed. If getting a significant
result is what gets you tenure and what gets you
published in the journals that confer prestige, and if pre-registration
only somewhat raises the cost of adjusting the analysis, many
researchers will adjust the analysis. The structural problem isn't transparency.
It's that the currency of science is novel positive results,
and no amount of transparency reform changes what the market
is paying for. Registered reports — where journals agree in
advance to publish the results regardless of outcome — do
substantially better. A twenty-twenty-one analysis found that only forty-four percent
of registered report studies confirmed their primary hypothesis, compared to
ninety-six percent of conventional psychology publications. That fifty-two-point gap is
itself a measure of how much publication bias dominates the
conventional literature. What would actually help. A few things appear
promising. Results-blind peer review, where reviewers see the methods and
data but not the findings before deciding whether to accept
the paper, is another intervention with theoretical appeal and limited
empirical testing. Citation correction mechanisms — tools that automatically flag
high-cited papers with known replication failures in Google Scholar and
institutional databases — would help if they existed at scale.
The harder problem is that science's incentive structure is set
by universities, not journals. Universities make hiring and tenure decisions
based on citation counts and journal prestige, both of which
currently reward the wrong things. Until those signals change —
until a lab that publishes ten rigorous small-effect replications is
as valuable on the market as one that publishes one
splashy overclocked positive result — the structural incentive to over-claim
remains. The number they chose to lead with. The fifty-five
percent headline is not a crisis number by accident. It's
the right number to announce. It sounds like the glass
is half full. It doesn't sound like the crisis is
ongoing, like the incentive structure is working against the correction
mechanism, like the effect sizes that did replicate came in
at about eighteen percent of their original explanatory power. It
sounds like a problem that science is working through. The
actual picture from the April twenty-twenty-six Nature study is that
the underlying incentive structure is largely unchanged. The most visible
sign: post-failure citation behavior shows the record-correction mechanism reaching only
twelve percent of subsequent scholarship on failed findings. The fields
most associated with rigorous causal identification may have the lowest
replication rates. And the reforms we've implemented so far are
being absorbed by the same incentive structure they were supposed
to fix. That's not a reason to distrust social science
wholesale — the fifty-five percent that replicated is real, and
the broader literature on effect sizes and statistical power has
genuinely changed how researchers design studies. But it is a
reason to read the next "surprising new study shows X"
headline with a different frame: not "this finding probably holds
up" but "this finding is surprising enough to have gotten
into a top journal, which means it was probably selected
for being surprising, which means it faces long odds." That's
the "What fifty-five percent replicate actually means" deep dive. Full
post and sources at jacobbrooke-ninety-five dot github dot i-o slash
jacobs-research-journal. Thanks for listening.